There is an election in Hungary on April
the 12th. Victor Orban is behind by
double-digit percentage points. For more
than a decade and a half, Victor Orban
has outlasted almost everyone in
European politics. He's proven very
adept at holding on to power, and he
clearly has a great appetite for power.
But he and the Hungary he shaped are
under pressure from stagnant growth,
high inflation, mounting scandals, and
now a formidable opponent.
Hungary's election is not just important
for voters in Hungary, but also in
Europe, the US, as well as in Russia.
Whoever is in power will have a very
hard time over the coming years to
address both societal, economic, and
political concerns. And what happens in
Hungary won't stay in Hungary.
Inside Europe, it wields influence far
beyond its size.
The loan remains blocked because one
leader is not honoring his word. So how
did Orban create one of Europe's most
durable political machines? Why is it
now under strain? And no matter who wins
in April, why does Hungary's next move
affect the rest of the world?
As a member of the European Union, even
small countries can veto decisions of
global significance, and Hungary is one
of them.
Hungary's allies in both the EU and NATO
have become used to Orban opposing many
of their joint initiatives. Hungary
plans to block every EU decision
concerning Ukraine until oil starts
flowing again through the Druzhba
pipeline in Ukraine. Hungary has dragged
its feet at NATO's expansion when it
took in eventually Finland as well as
Sweden, but only after serious
foot-dragging from Orban. Very often it
seems that the interest that the
Hungarian government is trying to
protect is that of Russia and sometimes
maybe even China.
Including via doubling down on Russian
energy contracts at a time when the EU
is trying to tighten sanctions. Much of
that stance reflects the priorities of
one man, Prime Minister Viktor Orban,
and his desire to move past the
country's former Soviet occupation.
He has cultivated ties in Moscow, in
Washington, and Beijing. He also waded
into US politics and endorsed Donald
Trump during his first presidential
campaign. And Trump returned the favor
recently endorsing Orban. But that
relationship is rooted in a system that
Prime Minister began building years
earlier.
Orban first won office in 1998 as the
leader of the right-wing Fidesz party.
He lost office in 2002, but not forever.
Orban returned to power after eight
years in opposition in 2010. He came
back to power with a mission to
institute regime change. And to build
what he later called an illiberal state,
an ideology that stems from his disdain
of liberal democracy. Almost the very
first thing he did was to pass a law
changing the electoral system.
In effect, critics say, helping entrench
Fidesz's advantage.
And that was only the start. Orban also
pushed through a new constitution. This
included removing, effectively, the top
Supreme Court justice. He also managed
to install his political loyalists in
vacant institutions as well as the
media. Newspapers were taken over by his
business allies. Some they actually just
shut down. That allowed him to
essentially create a national echo
chamber. Public media functions as a
megaphone communication channel for the
governing party. It has that kind of
sense of constantly cultivating images
of an enemy or a threat from outside.
For years, that grip helped him control
the political story, even as economic
strains mounted.
After returning to power on a wave of
anger over the financial crisis, Orbán
presided over years of modest growth,
rising wages, and new factory jobs. His
government delivered tangible financial
benefits to families. It's just that
with a sputtering economy, these have
become increasingly costly to sustain.
Economic growth and inflation have been
really the twin problems of the Orbán
government. Hungary had the highest
levels of inflation during after the
pandemic, and Hungarians had been really
struggling to make ends meet over the
past several years.
Adding to the pressure, since 2015,
house prices in Hungary have more than
tripled, outpacing the EU average and
rising faster than incomes for many
Hungarians.
It's a far cry from the tailwinds Orbán
enjoyed upon his return to office
following the initial challenge of
overcoming the effects of the global
financial crisis. He was very lucky at
the start. The world entered a period of
low inflation and global growth, and
then loads of European Union money
flooded in. And critics say that
actually a lot of that luck was wasted
cuz it was plowed into kind of visible
projects like, you know, prettification
of town squares, prestige building, and
things like that.
Meanwhile, neighbors like Poland pulled
ahead as Hungary lost momentum. Whether
it's income per capita or household
spending or cancer survival rates or
number of universities in the global top
1,000, and it's sort of now kind of at
the back of the queue, whereas once it
was at the top. Hungary was doing
relatively well after its accession to
the EU, but if we look at the
trajectory, we see that the Hungarian
economy is lagging behind, whereas
Poland is taking off.
The government has had to retrench
investments, including in public
services, that were never really well
funded to begin with. Orban himself has
had to pass an executive order to stock
hospitals with toilet paper.
Now, big industrial bets were meant to
restart growth and fix a lot of that,
but so far they've fallen short. Orban
has sought to position Hungary as a
bridge between East and West, including
economically, where, for example,
Hungary serves as a hub for German car
companies, especially during their
transition to the electric vehicle era.
So, he's brought in a lot of Asian,
Chinese, South Korean battery makers in
order to boost Hungary's economy. It
hasn't really delivered because the
transition to electric vehicles has gone
slightly more slowly than we expected,
and because the German economy, on which
Hungary relies for exports, is itself
struggling.
Then there were a series of scandals
coming out of the battery factories
relating to leaks of toxic chemicals
into the environment. At the same time,
anger grew over the widening gap between
a well-connected elite and ordinary
Hungarians.
Corruption has been one of the biggest
problems under the Orban administration.
According to Transparency International,
Hungary has plunged in rankings all the
way to last place in the European Union.
Taken together, a stagnant economy,
failing services, and deep corruption
created a powder keg.
That opening was seized by Peter Magyar,
a former insider of Orbán's ruling
elite.
It took an insider turned critique to
credibly deliver the message that the
system is rotten.
Using the once marginal TISZA party as
his vehicle, Magyar largely side-stepped
Orbán's media machine. He's visited
almost every city, every hamlet, he's
walked hundreds of kilometers to meet
voters. The new opposition party managed
to not only win over the supporters of
old opposition parties from the left and
the liberals in the capital, but also
build a strong base all over the
country. His appeal is simple. Keep what
voters like, strip out the corruption,
fix public services, and repair
Hungary's relationship with the EU.
Magyar must thread a very small needle,
appealing to disillusioned Fidesz voters
without alienating the center. If you
thought Fidesz was the right kind of
thing, then you probably are going to
think his party TISZA is kind of okay as
well. He is the main receptacle for just
about anybody who wants to get rid of
Orbán.
So, faced with a real challenger, Orbán
returned to a familiar playbook,
defining a new enemy. The campaign
strategy of Fidesz has been built on
fear-mongering. It was before the center
left and the liberal opposition,
Brussels and EU institutions, George
Soros, migrants, LGBTQ communities, and
now it's the war.
Orbán has made Ukraine essentially the
centerpiece of his campaign. There are
some really I eye-catching posters up
around the country.
The message is that life in Hungary is
tough, sure, but it could be so much
worse. And these cheeky Ukrainians are
prepared to risk all of that.
Orban is also portraying himself as a
strong leader who is taken seriously by
global leaders, but it less and less
resonates across the society.
Even if Orban Fidesz
loses this election, it doesn't mean
that Fidesz would lose power in the
system. He will still be the top of a
party with immense power, lots of money,
control of media assets, and a
demonstrated will to power, essentially.
There are captured state institutions
which could continue to represent
Fidesz's interests and could
significantly block the actions of a new
government.
Orban is the last politician that
anybody would count out.